---
type: architecture
status: accepted
---

# Guidelines For Writing Command-Line Interfaces

## Context

Command-line interfaces (abbrev. CLIs) are first-class in our world. Most of our users will primarily interact with Amaru via the means of a CLI.

Consistency is key to build good interface; and it is hard to get consistency unless guidelines and conventions are clearly spelled out.

This EDRs defines guidelines to follow when building CLI in the context of the Amaru project to keep the CLIs tidy and maximise the user experience.

## Decision

The top-level CLI command structure is as follows:

- `amaru`: invoking without options or arguments will always display the short help (as for `amaru -h`)
- `amaru -V`: displays short version information, i.e. only the `<MAX>.<MIN>.<DATE>` version string
- `amaru --version`: displays long version information including git commit etc.
- `amaru -q ...`: raise the minimum log level from `INFO` to `WARN`
- `amaru --color=<on|off|auto>`: control all pretty and color printing either directly or via “stdout is a terminal” — values `never` and `always` don’t make sense because this option control exactly one execution, but we may silently accept them anyway
- `amaru completions`: shell completions automatically generated by `clap`
- `amaru dev`: a **hidden** command group not normally used in production (i.e. for development of Amaru or dApps)
- `amaru node`: a command group for bootstrapping and running the node as well as resetting after failure; also for future command & control of a running node
- `amaru snapshot`: a command group for handling state snapshots
- `amaru transactions`: a command group supporting an SPO in their operational duties

Amaru does not offer destructive operations (like removing files or folders), there is no `--force` flag.
Instead, Amaru tells the operator to perform such actions when they are necessary.

The following list enumerates consistency rules for all parts of the CLI.

<details><summary><strong>Command groups are nouns, individual commands are verbs.</strong></summary>

Each command line starts with `amaru` followed by a drill-down into which object is being operated on, followed finally by a command that also sounds like one, i.e. it is a verb in imperative form.

Good example: `amaru node run`<br/>
Bad example: `amaru transaction info-action` (this should be extended with `create`)
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Use (positional) args for mandatory values, and long options for optional ones</strong></summary>

The upside of arguments is that they can be documented separate from options,
and appear first. It's easy to overwhelm users with options, so having the
ability to separate the *actually user-required bits* is useful.

The downside of arguments is that the user must remember their order, which can
be a burden if there are many of them. This should be minimised by providing
defaults wherever possible, making those inputs optional.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Options shall have associated environment variables as fallback.</strong></summary>

Many users enjoy using env vars for configuring their deployments.
The difficulty in documenting environment variables is mitigated by the 1:1 correspondence
with options and the diligent documentation of those, meaning that `clap` will document the
environment variables for us.

Each such variable name starts with `AMARU_`. Besides these, industry standards like
[OpenTelemetry variables][otel-vars] are respected.

> FIXME RK: with this reasoning, `AMARU_LOG` corresponds to a `--log` option while we disrespect the `RUST_LOG` industry standard; do we really want this?

Since options are optional, each associated value must have a default. This default must be
documented as part of the CLI, meaning that the default is applied at the level of `clap`,
not at the level of transforming `clap` arguments to configuration data structures.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Log final options considered for the each command.</strong></summary>

It can be hard to figure out what exactly gets used as final values: we have
defaults, env var fallbacks, and arguments derived from other arguments.

Displaying a summary as an `INFO` level log event clarifies the execution steps and help user troubleshoot configuration issues down the line.

Note that, we follow the following conventions:

- One field per arg / option
- Ordered alphabetically
- A single `_command` field confirms the command name
- An additional log message may follow.

```rust
info!(
    _command="run",
    chain_dir=%chain_dir.to_string_lossy(),
    ledger_dir=%ledger_dir.to_string_lossy(),
    listen_address=args.listen_address,
    max_downstream_peers = args.max_downstream_peers,
    max_extra_ledger_snapshots = %args.max_extra_ledger_snapshots,
    migrate_chain_db = args.migrate_chain_db,
    network=%args.network,
    peer_address=%args.peer_address.iter().map(|s| s.as_str()).collect::<Vec<_>>().join(", "),
    pid_file=%args.pid_file.unwrap_or_default().to_string_lossy(),
    "running"
);
```
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Use consistent `value_names` and `env` var names.</strong></summary>

`value_names` (a.k.a. meta-variables) refer to the kind of data expected for
the underlying option (filepath, dir, tcp address, etc..). It should be as
informative as possible, and identical for options that refer to objects of the
same nature (see string constants in `amaru/src/lib.rs`).
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Provide sound defaults whenever possible</strong></summary>

It's easy to get lost in _too many options_. So as much as possible, commands
should run with as little configuration as possible. In particular:

- Defaults must all be consistent with one-another between commands (!);
- Defaults may be derived from other options when necessary (we can derive a lot from the --network for example);
</details>

<details><summary><strong>8. Use flags for boolean values</strong></summary>

Don't:

```rust
#[arg(
    short, // we don’t do short options
    long,
    value_name = "BOOL", // shouldn’t use option parameter
    default_value_t = false
)]
show_validity: bool,
```

Do instead:

```rust
#[arg(long, default_value_t = false)]
show_validity: bool,
```

It is shorter, more intuitive and easier to document.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Document all options, with at least a top-level short description</strong></summary>

We use [clap](https://docs.rs/clap) as a command-line builder, which comes with
various conventions. One convention being that Rust doc comments on options are
translated into command-line descriptions.

Clap provides a short `-h` and long `--help` usage helps. In the short version,
only the first line of each description is shown. So it's important to
structure comments in this way too, ensuring that the important information
comes first; and details about the option comes after a single newline.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Display options in alphabetical order</strong></summary>

There's no "good manual order" for things like options. What one person would
think as logical, one other would deem messy. So the only real choice for
displaying options is to sort them alphabetically. It follows a principle of
least surprise and when done consistently, is easy to spot.
</details>

Finally, we abide by the following rules for the behaviour of running programs:

<details><summary><strong>Business output to `stdout`, logging to `stderr`</strong></summary>

Any textual output requested by the user is printed to `stdout` so that Unix pipes and tools can
be used to process it. This means that any additional output by `amaru` (logging etc.) must go to
`stderr`. This is done consistently even for commands that do not emit textual output.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Business output should be structured.</strong></summary>

In order to facilitate the processing of structured objects, these should be emitted using JSON
format. This rule only applies where this is helpful, a counter-example being a command that
lists some header hashes which should of course be printed as plain strings separated by newlines.

In case a stream of structured objects is to be emitted, newline-delimited JSON (ndjson) should
be used. This avoid the recipient having to first ingest a whole larger array before being able
to emit results, i.e. it allows realtime processing with less memory usage.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Use progress bars for long-running activities.</strong></summary>

For slow individual operations in commands that the user expects (and awaits) to finish, we
display a progress bar if pretty console outputs are enabled (i.e. subject to the `--color`
setting).

An exception is `amaru node run` which only emits tracing logs and uses those to indicate
progress during slow operations by giving regular progress updates.
</details>

<details><summary><strong>Signal initiates shutdown, second signal kills.</strong></summary>

The first SIGINT (i.e. `ctrl-C`) or SIGTERM initiates an orderly shutdown of the process.
The second such signal exits the process without further ceremony.

This behaviour can be simplified to just terminating for those invocations that don’t start
any components that offer an orderly shutdown ceremony.

We may add SIGHUP or SIGQUIT handling based on user feedback, for example SIGHUP to initiate
peer churn or SIGQUIT to log current consensus/ledger/mempool statistics.
</details>

## Consequences

<!-- Describe the result/consequences of applying that decision; both positive and negative outcomes -->

- To ensure a consistent `value_names` and `env` across all commands, we have factored them into dedicated modules under [amaru's lib](https://github.com/pragma-org/amaru/blob/main/crates/amaru/src/lib.rs).
- Various command-line changes introduced via [amaru#636](https://github.com/pragma-org/amaru/pull/636) to comply with these guidelines.

## Discussion points

<!-- Summarizes, a posteriori, the major discussion points around that decisions -->

- [amaru#636](https://github.com/pragma-org/amaru/pulls/636)

[otel-vars]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/configuration/sdk-environment-variables/
