---
type: architecture
status: accepted
---

# Defining a tracing span schema

## Context

EDRs [007 (Observability)][edr-observability] and [015 (nView metrics)][edr-metrics] define our general approach to observability and some guidance regarding metrics to enable infrastructure reuse between node implementations.
This EDR defines the guaranteed tracing spans exported for Cardano network health monitoring as well as the approach towards adding spans specific to Amaru maintenance and development and their initial setup.

## Decision

This section is structured by the kind of traces under consideration:

- all data handling pertaining to _blockchain_ handling, namely headers, blocks, and everything related to these
- handling transactions in the _mempool_
- _peer management_ activities

Each of these areas contains parts that are intended for node operators as well as implementation details relevant for Amaru developers.
It is important that the node admin can enable any desired trace to aid in debugging issues that may be observed in production.

All traces are classified first by a TARGET and within that target by a NAME (which is not to be confused with the span’s message).
The target gives a rough categorization and allows selecting traces pertaining to one of the major Amaru components (precise granularity to be decided case by case).

The name uniquely identifies the source location within a given target **(see discussion below)** and is composed from multiple components separated by dots.

1. a category for describing the type of work being done:

   - `setup` for starting up a component or subsystem
   - `check` for validating inputs, peer behaviour, authorization, integrity, etc.
   - `state` for computing or updating internal state
   - `db` for structured storage operations
   - `io` for all other file / storage / network operations
   - `cli` for all operations related to the command-line interface or terminal user interface
   - `perf` for dedicated performance measurements

2. a function, logical unit, data item, or similar
3. an operation (if applicable) described as a verb

> **IMPORTANT NOTICE ON `tracing` LEVELS**
>
> The `tracing` infrastructure we use to emit OpenTelemetry spans is built around log levels `TRACE`, `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARN`, `ERROR`.
> Log messages (including spans) from `INFO` upwards are printed to `stderr` by default and are part of the CLI / TUI design; these must not occur with high frequency and be relevant to a human observer.
> `TRACE` level is only intended for debug builds when actually debugging a specific code module, it is not considered viable to switch on all `TRACE` logging, and it is not considered viable to switch on ANY `TRACE` logging during normal operation; `TRACE` level is removed from release binaries by compile-time options.
>
> **For these reasons all nominally emitted trace spans intended for production use MUST be emitted at `DEBUG` level!**
>
> Since OpenTelemetry treats logs (i.e. tracing events a.k.a. log messages) as individually important, all debug logging that may occur at high rate MUST be emitted at `TRACE` level.

### Blockchain

The unit of processing for the chain is one block, which is logically also the unit for tracing.
We therefore generate a trace ID for each header received from upstream and associate the header hash with that trace ID as an OpenTelemetry property.
The trace ID can already be generated by the per-connection multiplexer when seeing inbound chainsync messages: traces that pertain to messages other than `chainsync::Message::RollForward` will not be tagged with the header hash property.

Each tracing span pertaining to header or block processing shall be associated with the trace ID for that header hash; this implies that this trace ID is transported through the consensus stages and via the external effects into stores and ledger.

#### Cardano Health Monitoring

> **TARGET:** `amaru::CHAIN_DIFFUSION`
>
> Even though the below spans are constructed in different consensus stages, this purpose justifies the overarching target selection.

One result of the Node Diversity Workshop in Porto (June 2–3, 2026) was a reaffirmation of the statement that core network health monitoring relies on recording four processing points:

1. first reception of a header from some upstream peer
2. first request to fetch the block sent to an upstream peer
3. first reception of the block from some upstream peer
4. local adoption of the block

We support this by opening a span with NAME `perf.e2e.forward` upon successful decoding of the header in `track_peers` and closing that span in `select_chain`, either upon seeing that the header is not on the best chain candidate or upon receiving the block validation result (which is slightly after adopting the block but typically before communicating the new tip to downstream peers);
this records points 1 and 4.

Points 2 and 3 are recorded by opening a span with NAME `perf.rb.fetch` in `fetch_blocks` when requesting a range containing that block and closing that range when the block has been received.

Switching to a different fork will then open a span with NAME `perf.fork.switch` for all blocks on the target fork.

#### Consensus

> **TARGET:** `amaru::consensus::*`

This category is only relevant when developing, improving, or debugging Amaru itself.
Each consensus stage invocation opens and closes a span whose TARGET matches the stage name (in the code, not the `pure-stage` identifier) with the NAME `state.msg.process`.
Further spans for tracking the execution time of individual processing steps are created where this is deemed helpful.

External `pure-stage` effect handling is extended such that the calling stage’s tracing span is set as the context when executing the effect logic.
This will tie for example all store or ledger spans to their parent span from the consensus stage that triggered the effect.

Messages sent to the `peer_selection` stage stemming from adversarial peer behaviour are associated with the related header’s trace ID.

The waiting time of a header in `select_chain` before being eligible for fetching blocks during catch-up (due to the back-pressure decoupling twixt `select_chain` and `fetch_blocks`) is made explicitly visible in the traces by opening and closing a span with NAME `perf.header_sync.wait` accordingly.

#### Ledger

> **TARGET:** `amaru::LEDGER`

All ledger operations (validating headers and blocks, performing reward calculations, etc.) are traced in this category.
Those activities that are related to a specific block will automatically be associated with the right tracing context via the parent propagation added to `pure-stage` effect handlers.
Activities spawned from such invocations that are not related to that block or header (like asynchronous rewards calculations) are NOT associated with the calling trace context and instead create new trace IDs.

### Mempool

> **TARGET:** `amaru::MEMPOOL`

Each received transaction gives rise to a trace ID associated with the transaction hash as a property.
The spans recorded are:

- NAME `state.txn.submit`: is opened upon local reception of the transaction and closed when inserted in the mempool or rejected
- NAME `state.txn.receive`: is opened upon N2N reception of the transaction and closed when inserted in the mempool or rejected
- NAME `state.txn.forward`: is opened when an upstream peer is requesting transactions and this transaction’s ID is sent; it is closed when the transaction has been sent to the peer

### Peer Management

> **TARGET:** `amaru::PEER`

This category covers all peer management operations like connecting, disconnecting, mini-protocol state changes, etc.
It is important to note that OpenTelemetry traces are not meant to be long-running while peers are long-lived entities.
We therefore do not associate a single trace ID with each peer but rather generate a new trace ID per peer management activity.

The precise design of spans and their names will be done at a later time.

## Consequences

## Discussion Points

- shall we make the span name globally unique, enforce that in the schema, and select the target automatically based on the name?

## References

[edr-observability]: ./007-observability.md
[edr-metrics]: ./015-recording-cardano-metrics.md
